The purpose of this study was to identify conditions that would increase the sensitivity of drug-resistant cancer cells. Previously, two anti-malarial drugs, chloroquine (CHL) and primaquine (PRI), showed different sensitization effects for vinblastine (VIB)-resistant cancer cells. Herein, we tested co-treatment of cells with CHL or PRI and other microtubule-targeting cancer drugs, namely, vinorelbine (VIO), paclitaxel (PAC), docetaxel (DOC), vincristine (VIC), or halaven (HAL). We found that PRI sensitized P-glycoprotein (P-gp)-overexpressing drug-resistant KBV20C cells to all six anti-mitotic drugs to a similar extent. CHL had a similar sensitization effect only for co-treatment with PAC, DOC, VIC, and HAL, while the sensitization effect was less marked for co-treatment with VIB or VIO. FACS analysis and western blot analysis revealed that G2arrest and apoptosis showed only a slight increase on co-treatment with VIB or VIO and CHL. We also found that phospho-histone H3 and pRb were markedly increased only by PRI-VIB co-treatment, but not by CHL-VIB co-treatment. This suggests that reduction in the expression of these proteins correlates with decreased G2arrest in CHL-VIB co-treatment. We further compared the effect of another anti-malarial drug, mefloquine (MEF), in combination with the six anti-mitotic drugs. We found that MEF and PRI had similar sensitization effects in co-treatment with these anti-mitotic drugs. PRI and MEF had generally similar sensitization effects in co-treatment with anti-mitotic drugs, suggesting that they do not have any preferred anti-mitotic drug partner in co-treatment. This indicates that only CHL shows specificity in co-treatment with anti-mitotic drugs in resistant cancer cells. Our results may contribute to the choice of anti-mitotic drugs to be used in co-treatment of resistant cancer cells with the anti-malarial drugs, CHL, PRI, and MEF. 
ATP Binding Cassette Transporter, Subfamily B, Member 1
Antimalarials
Antineoplastic Agents
Cell Line, Tumor
Chloroquine
Docetaxel
Drug Resistance, Neoplasm
Humans
Mitosis
Paclitaxel
Primaquine
Taxoids
Vinblastine
Vinorelbine
