1. The effects of in vivo administration of H2 blockers, cimetidine and ranitidine (0.6 mmol/kg body weight/day, for 5 days), on several P450 isozymes, the P450IID (CYP2D) subfamily, and their monooxygenase activities in rat liver microsomes were investigated. 2. In vivo administration of cimetidine and ranitidine decreased the contents of P450 isozymes and the activities of P450-linked monooxygenase systems; i.e., benzphetamine N-demethylase, aminopyrine N-demethylase, 7-ethoxycoumarin O-deethylase, debrisoquine 4-hydroxylase and bufuralol 1'-hydroxylase. 3. The inhibitory effect on the enzymatic activities of the P450IID (CYP2D)-linked monooxygenase systems was studied by Western blot analysis with serum containing anti-CYP2D6 IgG, i.e., LKM1 autoantibody. The amount of P450IID (CYP2D) in liver microsomes decreased more remarkably in the group administered ranitidine or cimetidine in vivo than in controls. 4. The effects of cimetidine and ranitidine on the activities of the P450IID (CYP2D)-linked monooxygenase systems were investigated in vitro. The activities of debrisoquine 4-hydroxylase and bufuralol 1'-hydroxylase were inhibited in vitro by cimetidine or ranitidine at a higher concentration than that on in vivo administration of either H2 blocker. 5. The kinetic parameters for cimetidine or ranitidine as to the activities of debrisoquine 4-hydroxylase and bufuralol 1'-hydroxylase in liver microsomes were determined by means of Lineweaver-Burk plots. 6. The suppressive effects of cimetidine and ranitidine on the activities of P450IID (CYP2D)-linked monooxygenase systems in vivo were found to be due to a decrease of the content of the P450IID (CYP2D) protein.
7-Alkoxycoumarin O-Dealkylase
Aminopyrine N-Demethylase
Animals
Blotting, Western
Cimetidine
Cytochrome P-450 CYP2D6
Cytochrome P-450 Enzyme System
Injections, Intraperitoneal
Male
Microsomes, Liver
Mixed Function Oxygenases
Oxidoreductases, N-Demethylating
Oxidoreductases, O-Demethylating
Ranitidine
Rats
Rats, Wistar
