OBJECTIVE: To assess the antihypertensive efficacy and safety of the novel AT1 receptor antagonist, telmisartan, compared with that of enalapril in elderly patients with mild to moderate hypertension.
DESIGN: A 26-week, multicenter, double-blind, parallel-group, dosage titration study.
METHODS: A total of 278 patients aged > or = 65 years were randomized to eithertelmisartan or enalapril once a day. The telmisartan dosage was increased from 20 to 40-80 mg and that of enalapril from 5 to 10-20 mg at 4-week intervals until trough supine diastolic blood pressure was < 90 mmHg. After 12 weeks, hydrochlorothiazide at 12.5-25 mg once a day was added to the treatment regimen of those patients not controlled on monotherapy.
RESULTS: Both treatments lowered blood pressure in a comparable and clinically meaningful manner. The adjusted mean changes from baseline in supine diastolic blood pressure at trough were -12.8 mmHg for telmisartan and -11.4 mmHg for enalapril (P = 0.074). Mean changes in supine systolic blood pressure were -22.1 mmHg for telmisartan and -20.1 mmHg for enalapril (P = 0.350). Overall, 63 and 62% of patients responded to telmisartan and enalapril, respectively, with a supine diastolic blood pressure of < 90 mmHg. Both regimens provided effective blood pressure lowering over the 24 h dosing interval, as determined by ambulatory blood pressure monitoring. Both regimens were well tolerated; however, patients on the enalapril regimen had more than double the incidence of treatment-related cough compared with those on the telmisartan regimen (16 versus 6.5%).
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that telmisartan is well tolerated and is at least as effective as enalapril in treating elderly patients with mild to moderate hypertension.
Administration, Oral
Aged
Angiotensin Receptor Antagonists
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors
Benzimidazoles
Benzoates
Blood Pressure
Blood Pressure Monitoring, Ambulatory
Diuretics
Dose-Response Relationship, Drug
Double-Blind Method
Enalapril
Female
Follow-Up Studies
Humans
Hydrochlorothiazide
Hypertension
Male
Quality of Life
Receptor, Angiotensin, Type 1
Receptor, Angiotensin, Type 2
Renin
Safety
Sodium Chloride Symporter Inhibitors
Supine Position
Telmisartan
Treatment Outcome
