Cefdinir, a new oral 2-amino-5-thiazolyl cephalosporin, inhibited the luminol-amplified chemiluminescence (LACL) response of human neutrophils stimulated by PMA but not opsonized zymosan, in a concentration-dependent but not time-dependent manner. The LACL response to opsonized zymosan in cytochalasin B-treated neutrophils was, however, inhibited by cefdinir. Various cephalosporins, regardless of the presence of a 2-amino-5-thiazolyl moiety, did not significantly alter the neutrophil LACL response triggered by PMA and zymosan. The LACL response induced by the calcium ionophore A23187 and FMLP was also impaired by cefdinir, and this impairment was increased in cytochalasin B-treated neutrophils. Superoxide anion generation by neutrophils, measured in terms of lucigenin-amplified chemiluminescence and cytochrome c reduction, was not altered. Spontaneous and FMLP-induced neutrophil degranulation, assessed by lysozyme and beta-glucuronidase release, were not modified by cefdinir. Furthermore, cefdinir inhibited LACL generation in cell-free systems consisting of H2O2, NaI, and either horseradish peroxidase or a myeloperoxidase-containing neutrophil extract. Orthodianisidine oxidation in these two acellular systems was inhibited by cefdinir. Cefdinir did not alter neutrophil bacterial killing at concentrations that inhibited myeloperoxidase-containing neutrophil extract-dependent reactions induced by soluble stimuli. Taken together, these data strongly suggest that cefdinir directly inhibits the activity of myeloperoxidase-containing neutrophil extract released into the extracellular medium during neutrophil stimulation by soluble mediators, but has no effect on that released into the phagolysosome during phagocytosis. This unusual property of a member of the beta-lactam family could be of interest in modulating the exaggerated inflammatory process often associated with infectious diseases.
Blood Bactericidal Activity
Calcimycin
Cefdinir
Cell Degranulation
Cephalosporins
Cytochalasin B
Extracellular Space
Humans
Hydrogen Peroxide
In Vitro Techniques
Luminescent Measurements
N-Formylmethionine Leucyl-Phenylalanine
Neutrophils
Peroxidase
Phagosomes
Tetradecanoylphorbol Acetate
Zymosan
