Regarding the involvement of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)-independent pathways in celecoxib-mediated antineoplastic effects, the following two issues remain outstanding: identity of the non-COX-2 targets and relative contributions of COX-2-dependent versus -independent mechanisms. We use a close celecoxib analog deficient in COX-2-inhibitory activity, DMC (4-[5-(2,5-dimethylphenyl)-3(trifluoromethyl)-1H-pyrazol-1-yl]benzene-sulfonamide), to examine the premise that Akt signaling represents a major non-COX-2 target. Celecoxib and DMC block Akt activation in PC-3 cells through the inhibition of phosphoinositide-dependent kinase-1 (PDK-1) with IC(50) of 48 and 38 micro M, respectively. The consequent effect on Akt activation is more pronounced (IC(50) values of 28 and 20 micro M, respectively), which might be attributed to the concomitant dephosphorylation by protein phosphatase 2A. In serum-supplemented medium, celecoxib and DMC cause G(1) arrest, and at higher concentrations, they induce apoptosis with relative potency comparable with that in blocking Akt activation. Moreover, the effect of daily oral celecoxib and DMC at 100 and 200 mg/kg on established PC-3 xenograft tumors is assessed. Celecoxib at both doses and DMC at 100 mg/kg had marginal impacts. However, a correlation exists between the in vitro potency of DMC and its ability at 200 mg/kg to inhibit xenograft tumor growth through the inhibition of Akt activation. Analysis of the tumor samples indicates that a differential reduction in the phospho-Akt/Akt ratio was noted in celecoxib- and DMC-treated groups vis-à-vis the control group. Together, these data underscore the role of 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase-1/Akt signaling in celecoxib-mediated in vitro antiproliferative effects in prostate cancer cells.
3-Phosphoinositide-Dependent Protein Kinases
Apoptosis
Celecoxib
Cell Division
Cell Line, Tumor
Cyclooxygenase 2
Cyclooxygenase 2 Inhibitors
Cyclooxygenase Inhibitors
G1 Phase
Humans
Isoenzymes
Male
Membrane Proteins
Prostaglandin-Endoperoxide Synthases
Prostatic Neoplasms
Protein-Serine-Threonine Kinases
Proto-Oncogene Proteins
Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt
Pyrazoles
Signal Transduction
Sulfonamides
