UNLABELLED: Candesartan cilexetil is completely converted to the nonpeptide angiotensin II receptor blocker candesartan during absorption from the gastrointestinal tract. Candesartan selectively blocks and dissociates slowly from the angiotensin II subtype 1 (AT1) receptor which mediates most of the known activities of angiotensin II. When administered once daily, oral candesartan cilexetil 8 to 32 mg dose-dependently and effectively reduces blood pressure in patients with mild to moderate essential hypertension. In comparative studies, candesartan cilexetil 8 mg/day was as effective as usual therapeutic dosages of enalapril, losartan potassium, hydrochlorothiazide and amlodipine. One study showed candesartan cilexetil 16 mg/day to be more effective than losartan potassium 50 mg/day. Furthermore, the combination of candesartan cilexetil with either hydrochlorothiazide or amlodipine resulted in additive antihypertensive effects. Preliminary evidence suggests that the blood pressure-lowering effects of candesartan cilexetil are associated with the prevention or improvement of end-organ damage in patients with hypertension. However, this requires further confirmation in clinical studies. Candesartan cilexetil improves insulin sensitivity in patients with hypertension and does not affect glucose homeostasis or the serum lipid profile in those with coexisting type 2 (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus. Candesartan cilexetil is well tolerated in patients with hypertension. Pooled data indicate that the tolerability profile of the drug is not significantly different from that of placebo, with headache being the most commonly reported event. Adverse events are not dose related and are mostly mild to moderate in severity. Candesartan cilexetil is better tolerated than enalapril, primarily because of a reduced incidence of cough, and was not associated with the hypokalaemia or hyperuricaemia seen with hydrochlorothiazide in a study in patients aged > or = 75 years. The drug has an adverse events profile similar to that of losartan potassium in patients with mild to moderate hypertension.
CONCLUSIONS: once daily candesartan cilexetil is effective and well tolerated when used once daily (as monotherapy or in combination with other antihypertensive agents) in patients with mild, moderate or severe hypertension. Initially, however, the drug is likely to be used as an alternative to other agents in patients not responding to or intolerant of their current drug therapy.
Aged
Animals
Antihypertensive Agents
Benzimidazoles
Biphenyl Compounds
Humans
Hypertension
Tetrazoles
