Sulindac, a widely used non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), has been shown to inhibit chemically induced carcinogenesis in animal models. In the present study, we have investigated the molecular mechanism by which sulindac affects the activity and expression of the enzymes that mediate the initial detoxification steps of many environmental carcinogens, the cytochromes P450 1A1, 1A2 and 1B1. Sulindac treatment of Sprague-Dawley rats resulted in a dose-dependent increase in hepatic cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzyme activity and in the expression of hepatic CYPs 1A1 and 1B1 mRNA. In the HepG2 human liver cancer cell line, sulindac caused a sustained, dose-dependent increase in CYP enzyme activity. Sulindac treatment resulted in a profound, dose-dependent increase in CYP 1A1 mRNA and a modest increase in 1A2 mRNA. The increase in CYP 1A1 mRNA induced by sulindac was, like enzyme activity, sustained for several days after the initial treatment. Sulindac induced the transcription of the CYP1A1 gene, as measured by the level of heterogeneous nuclear 1A1 RNA and by actinomycin D chase experiment. Since the transcription of CYP1A1 is under the control of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), we examined the ability of sulindac to activate the receptor. Sulindac bound to the AhR, as measured by ligand-binding assay, and induced the binding of the AhR with the xenobiotic-responsive element present in the promoter region of the CYP1A1 gene. These results are the first demonstration that NSAIDs modulate carcinogen metabolic enzymes and provide a novel mechanism to explain the established chemopreventive activity of sulindac.
Animals
Antineoplastic Agents
Breast Neoplasms
Carcinoma, Hepatocellular
Cytochrome P-450 CYP1A1
Dactinomycin
Dose-Response Relationship, Drug
Gene Expression Regulation, Enzymologic
Humans
In Vitro Techniques
Liver
Liver Neoplasms
Male
Promoter Regions, Genetic
Protein Synthesis Inhibitors
RNA, Messenger
Rats
Rats, Sprague-Dawley
Receptors, Aryl Hydrocarbon
Sulindac
Transcription, Genetic
Tumor Cells, Cultured
Xenobiotics
