Progressive cardiac remodeling is characterized by subsequent chamber hypertrophy, enlargement, and pump dysfunction. It is also associated with increased cardiac fibrosis and matrix turnover. Interestingly, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) alpha activators reduce cardiac hypertrophy, inflammation, and fibrosis. Little is known about the role of fenofibrates in mediating PPARalpha-independent effects in response to chronic pressure overload (PO). Wild-type and PPARalpha-deficient mice were subjected to chronic PO caused by ascending aortic constriction to test the role of fenofibrates in chronic, progressive cardiac remodeling by a PPARalpha-independent mechanism. Mice were randomized to regular chow or chow-containing fenofibrate (100 mg/kg of body weight per day) for 1 week before and 8 weeks after ascending aortic constriction. In the presence of PPARalpha, wild-type chronic PO mice, treated with fenofibrate, had improved cardiac remodeling. However, PO PPARalpha-deficient mice treated with fenofibrate had increased mortality, significantly adverse left ventricular end diastolic (3.4+/-0.1 versus 4.2+/-0.1 mm) and end systolic (1.5+/-0.2 versus 2.5+/-0.2 mm) dimensions, and fractional shortening (57+/-3% versus 40+/-3%). Fenofibrate also increased myocardial hypertrophy, cardiac fibrosis, and the ratio of matrix metalloproteinase-2/tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase-2 in PO PPARalpha-deficient mice. Fenofibrate inhibited matrix metalloproteinase activity in vitro and aldosterone-induced increases in extracellular signal-regulated kinase phosphorylation. Thus, fenofibrate improved cardiac remodeling in chronic PO mice. However, in PPARalpha-deficient mice, this chronic PO was exacerbated and associated with increased myocardial fibrosis and altered matrix remodeling. In the absence of PPARalpha, fenofibrates exerts deleterious, pleiotropic myocardial actions. This is an important observation, because PPARalpha agonists are considered possible inhibitory regulators of cardiac remodeling in the remodeled heart.
Aldosterone
Animals
Cells, Cultured
Chronic Disease
Extracellular Signal-Regulated MAP Kinases
Fenofibrate
Fibrosis
Hypertension
Hypolipidemic Agents
Kaplan-Meier Estimate
Matrix Metalloproteinase 2
Matrix Metalloproteinase 9
Matrix Metalloproteinase Inhibitors
Mice
Mice, Inbred Strains
Myocardium
Myocytes, Cardiac
PPAR alpha
Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptors
Phosphorylation
Time Factors
Tissue Inhibitor of Metalloproteinases
Ventricular Function, Left
