PURPOSE: Latanoprost, a prostaglandin F(2alpha) analogue, has become one of the most widely used medications for the treatment of glaucoma. The authors hypothesized that organic anion transporting polypeptides (OATPs) are responsible for the uptake of latanoprost into ocular tissues and, hence, that they contribute to the interindividual differences in drug concentrations and effects.
METHODS: Expression of prostaglandin (PG) transporters (OATP2A1, OATP2B1) in human ocular tissues was determined using real-time RT-PCR and immunofluorescence. The inhibitory interactions between latanoprost and its active metabolite (the free acid) and the uptake of prototypical substrates (PGE(2) and bromosulfophthalein) were tested in stably transfected human embryonic kidney cells overexpressing either OATP2A1 or OATP2B1. These cells were also used to investigate whether latanoprost and latanoprost acid are substrates of OATP2A1 or OATP2B1.
RESULTS: OATP2A1 and OATP2B1 mRNA expression was highest in the choroid/retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) complex and ciliary body. OATP2A1 protein expression was most prominent in the RPE and in epithelial and endothelial cell layers of anterior segment tissues, such as cornea, conjunctiva, iris, and ciliary body, whereas OATP2B1 protein was additionally expressed in trabecular meshwork, Schlemm canal, and choroidal vasculature. Latanoprost and latanoprost acid significantly inhibited both OATP2A1 and OATP2B1. Uptake experiments demonstrated that latanoprost acid is effectively transported by OATP2A1 (affinity constant [K(m)], 5.4 microM; maximum uptake rate [V(max)], 21.5 pmol/mg protein/min) and less effectively by OATP2B1.
CONCLUSIONS: The results presented herein suggest that at least OATP2A1 plays a role in the intraocular disposition of the therapeutically used prostanoid latanoprost.
Aged
Aged, 80 and over
Anterior Eye Segment
Antihypertensive Agents
Biological Transport
Cell Line
Choroid
Chromatography, Liquid
Female
Fluorescent Antibody Technique, Indirect
Gene Expression Regulation
Glaucoma
Humans
Intraocular Pressure
Kidney
Latanoprost
Male
Middle Aged
Organic Anion Transporters
Prostaglandins F, Synthetic
RNA, Messenger
Retinal Pigment Epithelium
Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
Tandem Mass Spectrometry
Transfection
