PURPOSE: To further understand alpha2 receptor signaling in the retina and the mechanisms that mediate ocular beneficial effects of brimonidine (an alpha2 agonist) and nimodipine (an L-type Ca(2+) channel blocker).
METHODS: The authors used in situ retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) in the isolated rat retina to characterize alpha2 modulation of NMDA receptor function and a rabbit retinal NMDA excitotoxicity model to verify in vitro findings under in vivo conditions. Electrophysiological (whole-cell patch clamp) recordings and Ca(2+) imaging were used to characterize NMDA receptor function and to verify the effect of various Ca(2+) channel blockers. In vivo drug application in rabbits was achieved by intravitreal injections.
RESULTS: Application of NMDA elicited a robust whole-cell inward current in individual in situ RGCs voltage clamped at -70 mV. Pretreatment with brimonidine significantly reduced NMDA-elicited currents in RGCs. This suppressive effect of brimonidine was substantially enhanced by background addition of nimodipine or isradipine, but not by diltiazem, verapamil, or cadmium. This effect of nimodipine was blocked by either a selective alpha2 antagonist, a cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) analogue, or an adenylate cyclase activator, indicating that nimodipine acts through the alpha2 receptor-G(alphai)-coupled pathway. Brimonidine protects RGCs in the rabbit excitotoxicity model. This brimonidine protection is also enhanced significantly by application of nimodipine but not of diltiazem.
CONCLUSIONS: These in vitro and in vivo findings demonstrate a novel neural mechanism involving nimodipine enhancement of alpha2 signaling in RGCs. This nimodipine effect appears to be independent of its classic L-type Ca(2+) channel-blocking action.
Adrenergic alpha-Agonists
Animals
Brimonidine Tartrate
Calcium
Calcium Channel Blockers
Excitatory Amino Acid Agonists
Injections
Male
Microscopy, Confocal
N-Methylaspartate
Nimodipine
Patch-Clamp Techniques
Quinoxalines
Rabbits
Rats
Rats, Inbred BN
Receptors, Adrenergic, alpha-2
Receptors, N-Methyl-D-Aspartate
Retinal Diseases
Retinal Ganglion Cells
Vitreous Body
