Angiotensin type 1 receptor blockers are widely used for the treatment of hypertension, and one angiotensin type 1 receptor blocker, telmisartan, specifically activates the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-gamma. We studied the impact of PPARgamma mutants on transcriptional control and interaction with cofactors to elucidate differences in the molecular mechanism between telmisartan and other PPARgamma agonists, thiazolidinediones (TZDs). We created several amino acid substitutions in the ligand binding domain of PPARgamma that, based on molecular modeling, may affect the binding of these agents. In transient expression experiments, wild-type PPARgamma-mediated transcription stimulated by telmisartan was more than one third of that stimulated by TZDs. The activation stimulated by TZDs was impaired, whereas activation stimulated by telmisartan was retained, in the H323Y, S342A, and H449A mutants. In the Y473A mutant, the TZD-induced activation was further impaired and lower than that of telmisartan-induced activation. Coexpression of coactivators enhanced the activation by both telmisartan and TZDs, but activation by telmisartan always exceeded that of TZDs in the Y473A mutant. Based on a mammalian two-hybrid assay, the interaction with corepressors was retained in Y473A. Telmisartan and TZDs, but not 9cis retinoic acid, dissociated corepressors from the wild-type PPARgamma. Telmisartan most effectively dissociated corepressors from Y473A. The interaction with coactivators was enhanced by TZD activation of wild-type PPARgamma and both telmisartan and TZD activation of Y473A. Thus, the Y473A mutant is selectively stimulated by telmisartan but not TZDs, suggesting that telmisartan and TZDs have differential effects on the transcriptional control. In conclusion, these PPARgamma mutants could be powerful tools for developing novel therapeutic agents that retain the metabolic efficacy of PPARgamma activation with fewer adverse effects, such as the increase in body weight associated with TZDs.
Angiotensin II Type 1 Receptor Blockers
Benzimidazoles
Benzoates
Cells, Cultured
Hormone Antagonists
Humans
Models, Biological
Mutant Proteins
PPAR alpha
PPAR delta
PPAR gamma
Protein Binding
Retinoid X Receptors
Substrate Specificity
Telmisartan
Thiazolidinediones
Transcriptional Activation
Transfection
