To examine the role of sulfhydryl (-SH) group in improvement of endothelial dysfunction with angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors in experimental high dose of methionine dieted rats. We compared the effects of Captopril (an ACE inhibitor with -SH group), enalapril (an ACE-inhibitor without -SH group), N-acetylcysteine (only -SH group not ACE inhibitor) on endothelial dysfunction injured by methionine-induced hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy) in rats. Male Sprague-Dawley rats were divided randomly into seven groups: control group, L-methionine group, low dose Captopril (15 mg/kg), middle dose Captopril (30 mg/kg), high dose Captopril (45 mg/kg), enalapril (20 mg/kg), N-acetylcysteine (200 mg/kg); control group were intragastric gavaged by water and others groups were intragastric gavaged by L-methionine and drugs in water one time every day. Acetylcholine (ACh)-induced endothelium-dependent relaxation (EDR), sodium nitroprusside (SNP)-induced endothelium-independent relaxation of aortic rings were examined. Paraoxonase1 (PON1) and ACE activity, malondialdehyde (MDA), nitric oxide (NO), superoxide dismutase (SOD) in serum were analyzed. It was found that a single intragastric gavage by L-methionine resulted in inhibition of endothelium-dependent relaxation, markedly increased the serum level of malondialdehyde and decreased the activity of PON1 and SOD, similarly decreased the level of NO in the serum; but had no effects on endothelium-independent relaxation and angiotensin-converting enzyme activity compared with the control group. Given the treatment with three doses of Captopril (15 approximately 45 mg/kg) markedly attenuated inhibition of vasodilator responses to ACh, and eliminated the increased level of malondialdehyde, the decreased level of NO, activity of PON1 and SOD in serum by single intragastric gavaged L-methionine. However, there were some significant differences among Captopril (30 mg/kg or 45 mg/kg), enalapril (20 mg/kg), and N-acetylcysteine particular in the activity of PON1 and ACE. These results suggested that Captopril can protect the vascular endothelium against the damages induced by L-methionine in rats, and the beneficial effects of Captopril may be related to attenuating the decrease in PON1 activity and NO levels. Furthermore, this protective effect may be concerned with the sulfhydryl group.
Acetylcysteine
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors
Animals
Aryldialkylphosphatase
Captopril
Enalapril
Endothelium, Vascular
Male
Malondialdehyde
Methionine
Nitric Oxide
Peptidyl-Dipeptidase A
Rats
Rats, Sprague-Dawley
Sulfhydryl Compounds
Superoxide Dismutase
Vasodilation
