OBJECTIVE: To assess the interaction between almotriptan, a 5-HT1B/1D-receptor agonist used to treat migraine, and verapamil, an agent for migraine prophylaxis.
METHODS: Twelve healthy volunteers received the following treatments in a crossover design: (1) 120-mg sustained-release verapamil tablet twice daily for 7 days and one 12.5-mg almotriptan tablet on day 7 and (2) one 12.5-mg almotriptan tablet alone on day 7. Serial plasma and urine samples were obtained on day 7. Almotriptan plasma concentrations were determined by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry; urine samples were analyzed by ultraviolet HPLC. Safety measures included blood pressure and pulse measurements, electrocardiography, and adverse event monitoring. Statistical comparisons of pharmacokinetic parameters and vital sign data were made by ANOVA.
RESULTS: Mean almotriptan peak concentration and area under the plasma concentration-time curve were significantly higher and volume of distribution and oral clearance were significantly lower after coadministration of almotriptan and verapamil compared with administration of almotriptan alone. The magnitudes of these differences were approximately 20%. Renal clearance was unaffected by verapamil coadministration. No significant effects of treatment on blood pressure or pulse were detected, with the exception of sitting systolic blood pressure at 2 hours after administration. However, the difference in mean change from baseline at this time point was only 8 mm Hg.
CONCLUSIONS: Verapamil modestly inhibited almotriptan clearance to a degree consistent with the modest contribution of CYP3A4 to almotriptan metabolism. This observation and the lack of effect of verapamil on the tolerability to almotriptan administration suggest that no reduction of the almotriptan dose is warranted.
Adolescent
Adult
Analysis of Variance
Blood Pressure
Calcium Channel Blockers
Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid
Cross-Over Studies
Delayed-Action Preparations
Drug Administration Schedule
Drug Interactions
Electrocardiography
Female
Humans
Indoles
Male
Middle Aged
Migraine Disorders
Reference Values
Serotonin Receptor Agonists
Tablets
Tryptamines
Verapamil
