The P450 enzyme, CYP3A4, extensively metabolizes both amprenavir and clarithromycin. To determine if an interaction exists when these two drugs are coadministered, the pharmacokinetics of amprenavir and clarithromycin were investigated in healthy adult male volunteers. This was a Phase I, open-label, randomized, balanced, multiple-dose, three-period crossover study. Fourteen subjects received the following three regimens: amprenavir, 1,200 mg twice daily over 4 days (seven doses); clarithromycin, 500 mg twice daily over 4 days (seven doses); and the combination of the above regimens over 4 days (seven doses of each drug). Twelve subjects completed all treatments and the follow-up period. The erythromycin breath test (ERMBT) was administered at baseline, 2 h after the final dose of each of the three regimens and at the first follow-up visit. Coadministration of clarithromycin and amprenavir significantly increased the mean amprenavir AUC(ss), C(max,ss), and C(min,ss) by 18, 15, and 39%, respectively. Amprenavir had no significant effect on the AUC(ss) of clarithromycin, but the median T(max,ss)for clarithromycin increased by 2.0 h, renal clearance increased by 34%, and the AUC(ss) for 14-(R)-hydroxyclarithromycin decreased by 35% when it was given with amprenavir. Amprenavir and clarithromycin reduced the ERMBT result by 85 and 67%, respectively, and by 87% when the two drugs were coadministered. The baseline ERMBT value did not correlate with clearance of amprenavir or clarithromycin. A pharmacokinetic interaction occurs when amprenavir and clarithromycin are coadministered, but the effects are not likely to be clinically important, and coadministration does not require a dosage adjustment for either drug.
Adolescent
Adult
Anti-Bacterial Agents
Anti-HIV Agents
Area Under Curve
Biotransformation
Breath Tests
Carbamates
Clarithromycin
Cross-Over Studies
Cytochrome P-450 CYP3A
Cytochrome P-450 Enzyme Inhibitors
Cytochrome P-450 Enzyme System
Drug Combinations
Drug Interactions
Enzyme Inhibitors
Erythromycin
Half-Life
Humans
Liver Function Tests
Male
Mixed Function Oxygenases
Sulfonamides
