BACKGROUND: Heroin dependence is associated with a hyperactive hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, proposed as a biological correlate of craving. Maintenance treatment with methadone normalizes HPA axis activity. Here, we examined HPA axis activity under maintenance treatment with the increasingly utilized partial opiate agonist buprenorphine.
METHODS: Responses to a metyrapone challenge were compared in 20 buprenorphine-maintained heroin addicts and 20 healthy volunteers (10 received a single 50 mg naltrexone dose [NTX+] and 10 received no naltrexone [NTX-]). Patients were 16 male subjects and 4 female subjects, aged 30 to 38 years, heroin-dependent and relapse-free under buprenorphine maintenance (BUP) for a minimum of 6 months. Healthy volunteers were 9 male subjects and 11 female subjects, aged 36 to 49 years, with no history of dependence. Serial measures were obtained of plasma adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and cortisol and Profile of Mood States (POMS) ratings over time. Subjects were genotyped for the OPRM1 118A/G polymorphism.
RESULTS: Buprenorphine maintenance showed a dampened HPA axis response to metyrapone, with OPRM1 118G carriers showing a significantly attenuated response compared with 118A carriers. The response of the NTX+ group was markedly increased. In contrast, negative affect was elevated in the BUP group but did not differ between NTX- and NTX+. Buprenorphine maintenance and NTX- groups did not differ in positive affect, whereas the NTX+ group was lower.
CONCLUSIONS: In contrast to exaggerated HPA axis responsiveness reported in untreated heroin dependence, response to metyrapone was subnormal in heroin addicts maintained on buprenorphine. Despite this, increased measures of negative affect were seen in this group. This implies a dissociation of HPA axis responsiveness and affect in heroin dependence.
Adult
Affect
Asparagine
Buprenorphine
DNA Mutational Analysis
Drug Interactions
Enzyme Inhibitors
Female
Heroin Dependence
Humans
Hypothalamo-Hypophyseal System
Male
Metyrapone
Middle Aged
Naltrexone
Narcotic Antagonists
Pituitary-Adrenal System
Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide
Receptors, Opioid, mu
Time Factors
