Multidrug resistance conferred to cancer cells is often mediated by the expression of efflux transporter "pumps". It is also believed that many of the same transporters are involved in drug efflux from numerous normal endothelial and epithelial cell types in the intestine, brain, kidney, and liver. Etoposide transport kinetics were characterized in Caco-2 cells and in well established Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCKII) cell lines that were stably-transfected with a human cDNA encoding P-glycoprotein (Pgp), human multidrug resistance protein (MRP1), or the canalicular multispecific organic anion (cMOAT) transporters to determine the roles of these transporters in etoposide efflux. Etoposide transport kinetics were concentration-dependent in the MDCKII-MDR1 and MDCKII-cMOAT cells. The apparent secretory Michaelis constant (Km) and carrier-mediated permeability (Pc) values for Pgp and cMOAT were 254.96 +/- 94.39 microM and 5.96 +/- 0.41 x 10(-6) cm/s and 616.54 +/- 163.15 microM and 1.87 +/- 0.10 x 10(-5) cm/s, respectively. The secretory permeability of etoposide decreased significantly in the basal to apical (B to A) (i.e., efflux) direction, whereas the permeability increased 2.3-fold in the apical to basal (A to B) direction in MDCKII-MDR1 cells in the presence of elacridar (GF120918). Moderate inhibition of etoposide efflux by leukotriene C4 (LTC4) was observed in MDCKII-cMOAT cells. Furthermore, etoposide inhibited LTC4 efflux, confirming the involvement of cMOAT. The flux of etoposide in MDCKII-MRP1 cells was similar to that in MDCKII/wt control cells. The current results demonstrate that the secretory transport mechanism of etoposide involves multiple transporters, including Pgp and cMOAT but not MRP1. These results demonstrate that Pgp and cMOAT are involved in the intestinal secretory transport of etoposide. Since the intestinal secretion of etoposide was previously reported in the literature, it also suggests that they may be involved in the in vivo intestinal secretion of etoposide; however, mechanistic in vivo studies are required to confirm this.
ATP Binding Cassette Transporter, Subfamily B, Member 1
Acridines
Animals
Antineoplastic Agents, Phytogenic
Biological Transport
Caco-2 Cells
Cell Line
Dogs
Dose-Response Relationship, Drug
Drug Resistance, Multiple
Drug Resistance, Neoplasm
Etoposide
Humans
Immunoblotting
Isoquinolines
Kidney
Leukotriene C4
Membrane Transport Proteins
Multidrug Resistance-Associated Proteins
Nucleic Acid Synthesis Inhibitors
Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
Tetrahydroisoquinolines
