BACKGROUND: The active metabolite of the anti-inflammatory drug nabumetone has been characterized as a selective inhibitor of the inducible prostaglandin H synthase (PGHS). The aim of this study was to investigate the rate of eicosanoid biosynthesis after oral dosing with nabumetone in nine healthy subjects.
METHODS: We measured the urinary excretion of products of platelet (11-dehydro-thromboxane B2 [TXB2]) and renal (prostaglandin IF2 alpha [PGF2 alpha]) arachidonate metabolism as in vivo indexes of the constitutive PGHS-1 pathway. Moreover, the production of TXB2 during whole blood clotting was assessed as an index of the cyclooxygenase activity of platelet PGHS-1 ex vivo.
RESULTS: At steady state, nabumetone (500 and 1000 mg daily for 7 days) was associated with statistically significant dose-dependent reduction in the urinary excretion of 11-dehydro-TXB2 and serum TXB2 levels by approximately 50% to 70%. However, the drug did not significantly affect the urinary excretion of PGF2 alpha. After discontinuation of nabumetone, urinary 11-dehydro-TXB2 excretion and whole blood TXB2 production returned to predrug levels with a similar timecourse that was consistent with the elimination half-life of its active metabolite. The daily administration of low-dose aspirin (40 mg), a selective inhibitor of platelet PGHS-1, caused a cumulative inhibition of urinary 11-dehydro-TXB2 and whole blood TXB2 production that recovered with a timecourse consistent with platelet turnover.
CONCLUSIONS: Nabumetone does dose-dependently inhibit the cyclooxygenase activity of platelet PGHS-1 of healthy subjects both in vivo and ex vivo. Thus it is unlikely that its safety profile in patients may be related to selective inhibition of the inducible PGHS-2.
Administration, Oral
Adult
Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non-Steroidal
Arachidonic Acid
Blood Platelets
Butanones
Cyclooxygenase Inhibitors
Dinoprost
Female
Humans
Isoenzymes
Kidney
Male
Middle Aged
Nabumetone
Prostaglandin-Endoperoxide Synthases
Thromboxane B2
