PURPOSE: Previous studies show that inhibition of ABCB1 expression overcomes acquired docetaxel resistance in C4-2B-TaxR cells. In this study, we examined whether antiandrogens, such as bicalutamide and enzalutamide, could inhibit ABCB1 activity and overcome resistance to docetaxel.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: ABCB1 efflux activity was determined using a rhodamine efflux assay. ABCB1 ATPase activity was determined by Pgp-Glo assay systems. The effects of the antiandrogens bicalutamide and enzalutamide on docetaxel sensitivity were determined by cell growth assays and tumor growth in vivo.
RESULTS: We found that bicalutamide and enzalutamide inhibit ABCB1 ATP-binding cassette transporter activity through blocking ABCB1 efflux activity. Bicalutamide inhibited ABCB1 efflux activity by 40%, whereas enzalutamide inhibited ABCB1 efflux activity by approximately 60%. Both bicalutamide and enzalutamide inhibit ABCB1 ATPase activity. In addition, bicalutamide and enzalutamide inhibit ABCB1 efflux activity and desensitize docetaxel-resistant and androgen receptor (AR)-negative DU145 cells. Combination of bicalutamide with docetaxel had a significant antitumor effect in both AR-positive and AR-negative docetaxel-resistant xenograft models, suggesting that bicalutamide desensitizes docetaxel-resistant cells to docetaxel treatment independent of AR status.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a novel mechanism of action for antiandrogens such as bicalutamide and enzalutamide as inhibitors of ABCB1 efflux and ATPase activity. Bicalutamide and enzalutamide desensitize docetaxel-resistant prostate cancer cells to docetaxel treatment independent of AR status. These studies may lead to the development of combinational therapies with bicalutamide/enzalutamide and docetaxel as effective regimens to treat advanced prostate cancer independent of AR status, and possibly other types of cancer.
ATP Binding Cassette Transporter, Subfamily B
Adenosine Triphosphatases
Adenosine Triphosphate
Androgen Antagonists
Anilides
Animals
Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols
Cell Line, Tumor
Docetaxel
Drug Resistance, Neoplasm
Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic
Humans
Male
Mice
Nitriles
Phenylthiohydantoin
Prostatic Neoplasms
Prostatic Neoplasms, Castration-Resistant
Receptors, Androgen
Rhodamines
Taxoids
Tosyl Compounds
Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
