BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Bupivacaine is a racemic mixture of S(-)- and R(+)-enantiomers. Both isomers have similar potency as local anesthetics, but the S(-)-enantiomer produces less central nervous system and cardiovascular toxicity. Local anesthetic-induced convulsion is likely to be associated with not only sodium channel but also ligand-gated ion channel. The present study investigates the direct effects of the stereoenantiomers of bupivacaine on 4 recombinant ligand-gated ion-channel receptors.
METHODS: The antagonist activities of the S(-)- and R(+)-enantiomers of bupivacaine were tested at the nicotinic acetylcholine, N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA), gamma-aminobutyric acid(A) (GABA(A)), and 5-hydroxytryptamine(3A) (5-HT(3A)) receptors expressed in Xenopus oocytes using a 2-voltage clamp technique.
RESULTS: Racemic bupivacaine and its 2 enantiomers all antagonized the 4 receptors in a concentration-dependent manner. Potencies at nicotinic acetylcholine, NMDA, and 5-HT(3A) receptors were similar. At GABA(A) receptors, the potency of R(+)-bupivacaine was less than racemic bupivacaine or levobupivacaine.
CONCLUSIONS: Comparison of the antagonist potencies with local concentrations obtained in clinical use suggests that bupivacaine and its enantiomers are likely to produce extensive inhibition at the nicotinic acetylcholine, NMDA, and 5-HT(3A) receptors but a much weaker and probably not clinically relevant effect at the GABA(A) receptor. It is possible that direct effects at these receptors may contribute, at least in part, to the spinal and epidural anesthesia induced by these compounds. It is unlikely, however, that the difference of the toxicity in bupivacaine enantiomers is because of the stereoselectivities of bupivacaine at ligand-gated ion-channel receptors studied.
Anesthetics, Local
Animals
Bupivacaine
Dose-Response Relationship, Drug
GABA-A Receptor Antagonists
Ion Channels
Levobupivacaine
Nicotinic Antagonists
Oocytes
Patch-Clamp Techniques
Receptors, N-Methyl-D-Aspartate
Receptors, Nicotinic
Serotonin 5-HT3 Receptor Antagonists
Stereoisomerism
Xenopus
