OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to examine the effects of lovastatin on cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4 and P-glycoprotein (P-gp) in vitro and then to determine the effects of lovastatin on the pharmacokinetics of diltiazem and its main metabolite, desacetyldiltiazem, in rats.
METHODS: The pharmacokinetic parameters of diltiazem and desacetyldiltiazem were determined after orally administering diltiazem (12 mg/kg) to rats in the presence and absence of lovastatin (0.3 and 1.0 mg/kg). The effect of lovastatin on P-gp as well as CYP3A4 activity was also evaluated.
KEY FINDINGS: Lovastatin inhibited CYP3A4 enzyme activity with a 50% inhibition concentration of 6.06 µM. In addition, lovastatin significantly enhanced the cellular accumulation of rhodamine-123 in MCF-7/ADR cells overexpressing P-gp. Compared with the control (given diltiazem alone), the presence of lovastatin significantly altered the pharmacokinetic parameters of diltiazem. The areas under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) and the peak concentration of diltiazem were significantly increased (P < 0.05, 1.0 mg/kg) in the presence of lovastatin. Consequently, the absolute bioavailability values of diltiazem in the presence of lovastatin (11.1% at 1.0 mg/kg) were significantly higher (P < 0.05) than that of the control group (7.6%). The metabolite-parent AUC ratio in the presence of lovastatin (1.0 mg/kg) was significantly (P < 0.05) decreased compared with the control group.
CONCLUSIONS: It might be considered that lovastatin resulted in reducing the first-pass metabolism in the intestine and/or in the liver via inhibition of CYP3A4 and increasing the absorption of diltiazem in the intestine via inhibition of P-gp by lovastatin.
ATP Binding Cassette Transporter, Subfamily B, Member 1
Administration, Oral
Animals
Area Under Curve
Biological Availability
Calcium Channel Blockers
Cytochrome P-450 CYP3A
Cytochrome P-450 CYP3A Inhibitors
Cytochrome P-450 Enzyme Inhibitors
Cytochrome P-450 Enzyme System
Diltiazem
Dose-Response Relationship, Drug
Drug Interactions
Humans
Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA Reductase Inhibitors
Lovastatin
Male
Rats
Rats, Sprague-Dawley
