Ziprasidone is a novel antipsychotic agent which binds with high affinity to 5-HT1A receptors (Ki = 3.4 nM), in addition to 5-HT1D, 5-HT2, and D2 sites. While it is an antagonist at these latter receptors, ziprasidone behaves as a 5-HT1A agonist in vitro in adenylate cyclase measurements. The goal of the present study was to examine the 5-HT1A properties of ziprasidone in vivo using as a marker of central 5-HT1A activity the inhibition of firing of serotonin-containing neurons in the dorsal raphe nucleus. In anesthetized rats, ziprasidone dose-dependently slowed raphe unit activity (ED50 = 300 micrograms/kg i.v.) as did the atypical antipsychotics clozapine (ED50 = 250 micrograms/kg i.v.) and olanzapine (ED50 = 1000 micrograms/kg i.v.). Pretreatment with the 5-HT1A antagonist WAY-100,635 (10 micrograms/kg i.v.) prevented the ziprasidone-induced inhibition; the same dose of WAY-100,635 had little effect on the inhibition produced by clozapine and olanzapine. Because all three agents also bind to alpha 1 receptors, antagonists of which inhibit serotonin neuronal firing, this aspect of their pharmacology was assessed with desipramine (DMI), a NE re-uptake blocker previously shown to reverse the effects of alpha 1 antagonists on raphe unit activity. DMI (5 mg/kg i.v.) failed to reverse the inhibitory effect of ziprasidone but produced nearly complete reversal of that of clozapine and olanzapine. These profiles suggest a mechanism of action for each agent, 5-HT1A agonism for ziprasidone and alpha 1 antagonism for clozapine and olanzapine. The 5-HT1A agonist activity reported here clearly distinguishes ziprasidone from currently available antipsychotic agents and suggests that this property may play a significant role in its pharmacologic actions.
Action Potentials
Adrenergic Uptake Inhibitors
Animals
Benzodiazepines
Clozapine
Desipramine
Dose-Response Relationship, Drug
Male
Neurons
Olanzapine
Piperazines
Pirenzepine
Pyridines
Raphe Nuclei
Rats
Rats, Sprague-Dawley
Receptors, Serotonin
Receptors, Serotonin, 5-HT1
Serotonin Antagonists
Serotonin Receptor Agonists
Serotonin Uptake Inhibitors
Thiazoles
