BACKGROUND: Potential drug-drug interactions can be identified in vitro by exploring the importance of specific cytochrome P450 (CYP) isozymes for drug metabolism. The metabolism of the local anesthetic ropivacaine to 3-hydroxyropivacaine and (S)-2',6'-pipecoloxylidide was shown in vitro to be dependent on CYP1A2 and 3A4, respectively. In this in vivo model study we quantitated the role of these 2 isozymes for the metabolism of ropivacaine.
METHODS: In a randomized, 3-way crossover study, 12 healthy subjects received a single dose of 40 mg ropivacaine intravenously alone or combined either with 25 mg fluvoxamine as a CYP1A2 inhibitor or with 100 mg ketoconazole as a CYP3A4 inhibitor twice daily for 2 days. Venous plasma and urine samples were collected over 10 hours and 24 hours, respectively. The samples were analyzed for ropivacaine base, 3-hydroxyropivacaine, and (S)-2',6'-pipecoloxylidide.
RESULTS: Coadministration with fluvoxamine decreased the mean total plasma clearance of ropivacaine from 354 to 112 mL/min (68%), whereas ketoconazole decreased plasma clearance to 302 mL/min (15%). The relative changes in unbound plasma clearance were similar to the changes in total plasma clearance. The ropivacaine half-life (t1/2) of 1.9 hours was almost doubled during fluvoxamine administration and the plasma concentration at the end of infusion increased slightly, whereas the corresponding parameters after ketoconazole administration remained unchanged. Coadministration with ketoconazole almost abolished the (S)-2',6'-pipecoloxylidide concentrations in plasma, whereas fluvoxamine administration increased the (S)-2',6'-pipecoloxylidide levels. The fraction of dose excreted as 3-hydroxyropivacaine in urine decreased during fluvoxamine administration from 39% to 13%.
CONCLUSIONS: CYP1A2 is the most important isozyme for the metabolism of ropivacaine. Drug-drug interactions with strong inhibitors of this isozyme could be of clinical relevance during repeated administration. A potent inhibitor of CYP3A4 causes a minor decrease in clearance, which should be of no clinical relevance.
Adult
Amides
Anesthetics, Local
Cross-Over Studies
Cytochrome P-450 CYP1A2
Cytochrome P-450 CYP3A
Cytochrome P-450 Enzyme System
Enzyme Inhibitors
Female
Fluvoxamine
Humans
Ketoconazole
Male
Mixed Function Oxygenases
Reference Values
Ropivacaine
Time Factors
