1 In rats anaesthetized with pentobarbitone, intravenous administration of desipramine (0.1 mg/kg), maprotiline (0.5 mg/kg) or mianserin (0.3-3.0 mg/kg) did not modify the blood pressure lowering effects of acetylcholine (0.25-1.0 micrograms/kg, i.v.) which were significantly reduced by atropine (3.0 micrograms/kg, i.v.). 2 Maprotiline and mianserin, like promethazine (0.1 mg/kg, i.v.), inhibited the vasodepressor responses evoked by histamine (2.5-10.0 micrograms/kg,i.v.). however, desipramine was inactive against histamine. 3 In pithed rats, the pressor effects of intravenous 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT: 5.0-20.0 micrograms/kg) were antagonized by mianserin (0.01-0.3 mg/kg, i.v.) and cyproheptadine (0.01 mg/kg) but were unaffected by maprotiline and desipramine. 4 In syrosingopine pretreated rats given mianserin 0.1 mg/kg, intravenously, 5-HT (20.0 micrograms/kg, i.v.) produced a significant fall in blood pressure which could be reduced by a large dose of mianserin (10.0 mg/kg, i.v.). 5 In conclusion, desipramine, maptrotiline and mianserin, in doses previously found to inhibit noradrenaline neuronal reuptake in the rat cardiovascular system, lack muscarinic receptor antagonist properties. Whilst maprotiline and mianserin blocked vascular histamine receptors, only mianserin (10.0 mg/kg, i.v.). 5 In conclusion, desipramine, maptrotiline and mianserin, in doses previously found to inhibit noradrenaline neuronal reuptake in the rat cardiovascular system, lack muscarinic receptor antagonist properties. Whilst maprotiline and mianserin blocked vascular histamine receptors, only mianserin, like cyproheptadine, was a potent antagonist of the 5-HT receptors that mediate increases in blood pressure in rats. Finally, the vasodepressor effects of 5-HT in syrosingopine pretreated rats given a small dose of mianserin were antagonized by a large dose of mianserin, suggesting that 5-HT may activate two distinct types of receptors in the rat.
Acetylcholine
Animals
Antidepressive Agents, Tricyclic
Blood Pressure
Desipramine
Drug Interactions
Histamine
Male
Maprotiline
Mianserin
Rats
Rats, Inbred Strains
Reserpine
Serotonin
