2'-Chloropentostatin is a new inhibitor of adenosine deaminase isolated from the fermentation broth of an unidentified actinomycete, ATCC 39365. It contains the aglycone of coformycin, i.e. 3,6,7,8-tetrahydroimidazo[4,5-d][1,3]diazepin-8-o1, coupled to the unusual carbohydrate, 2'-chloro-2'-deoxyribose. 2'-Chloropentostatin is a slightly weaker inhibitor of rat and human adenosine deaminases than coformycin, and considerably weaker than pentostatin. Unlike pentostatin, which appears to undergo a two-stage interaction with adenosine deaminase, 2'-chloropentostatin forms a single enzyme-inhibitor complex. The enzyme-inhibitor complex between adenosine deaminase and 2'-chloropentostatin was much more rapidly dissociable than the complex with pentostatin. The complex between adenosine deaminase and 2'-chloropentostatin dissociated with a half-life of approximately 3 hr, compared with 68 hr for the complex between adenosine deaminase and pentostatin. 2'-Chloropentostatin, at concentrations up to 10 micromolar, did not cause significant inhibition of growth of WI-L2 human B-cell lymphoblasts, or of CCRF-CEM human T-cell lymphoblasts in culture. However, it greatly potentiated the inhibitory potency of adenosine, 2'-deoxyadenosine, or arabinosyladenine towards these cell lines. This potentiating effect was equipotent for 2'-chloropentostatin and pentostatin. T-cells (CCRF-CEM) were much more sensitive to the inhibitory effect of combinations of adenosine or 2'-deoxyadenosine with 2'-chloropentostatin or pentostatin than were B-cells (WI-L2). Pentostatin and 2'-chloropentostatin had no significant antitumor activity against mouse leukemia L1210 in vivo. However, these adenosine deaminase inhibitors, at nontoxic doses, greatly potentiated the antitumor activity of ara-A 5'-phosphate. 2'-Chloropentostatin was somewhat more active in this regard than was pentostatin.
Adenine Nucleotides
Adenosine Deaminase Inhibitors
Animals
Cell Survival
Cells, Cultured
Coformycin
Drug Synergism
Enzyme Activation
Kinetics
Leukemia L1210
Mice
Mice, Inbred DBA
Nucleoside Deaminases
Nucleosides
Pentostatin
Rats
Rats, Inbred ACI
Vidarabine Phosphate
