Zolmitriptan is a novel and highly selective 5-HT(1B/1D) receptor agonist used as an acute oral treatment for migraine. There are few reports regarding the in vitro metabolism of zolmitriptan. Previous studies indicated zolmitriptan was metabolized via CYP1A2 in human hepatic microsomes. In order to study the enzyme kinetics and drug interaction, the metabolism of zolmitriptan and possible drug-drug interactions were investigated in rat hepatic microsomes induced with different inducers. An active metabolite, N-demethylzolmitriptan, was detected and another minor, inactive metabolite that was reported in human hepatic microsomes was not detected in this study. The enzyme kinetics for the formation of N-demethylzolmitriptan from zolmitriptan in rat liver microsomes pretreated with BNF were 96+/-22 microM (K(m)), 11+/-3 pmol min(-1)mg protein(-1) (V(max)), and 0.12+/-0.02 microl min(-1)mg protein(-1) (CL(int)). Fluvoxamine and diphenytriazol inhibited zolmitriptan N-demethylase activity catalyzed by CYP1A2 (K(i)=3.8+/-0.3 and 3.2+/-0.1 microM, respectively). Diazepam and propranolol elicited a slight inhibitory effect on the metabolism of zolmitriptan (K(i)=70+/-11 and 90+/-18 microM, respectively). Cimetidine and moclobemide produced no significant effect on the metabolism of zolmitriptan. Fluvoxamine yielded a k(inactivation) value of 0.16 min(-1), and K(i) of 57 microM. The results suggest that rat hepatic microsomes are a reasonable model to study the metabolism of zolmitriptan, although there is a difference in the amount of minor, inactive metabolites between human hepatic microsomes and rat liver microsomes. The results of the inhibition experiments provided information for the interactions between zolmitriptan and drugs co-administrated in clinic, and it is helpful to explain the drug-drug interactions of clinical relevance on enzyme level. This study aso demonstrated that fluvoxamine may be a mechanism-based inactivator of CYP1A2.
Animals
Cimetidine
Cytochrome P-450 CYP1A2
Diazepam
Drug Interactions
Enzyme Induction
Enzyme Inhibitors
Fluvoxamine
Humans
In Vitro Techniques
Kinetics
Male
Microsomes, Liver
Moclobemide
Oxazolidinones
Propranolol
Rats
Rats, Sprague-Dawley
Serotonin Receptor Agonists
Species Specificity
Tryptamines
beta-Naphthoflavone
