Nabumetone is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) of the 2,6-disubstituted naphthyl-alkanone class. Nabumetone is metabolised to an active metabolite 6-methoxy-2-napthylacetic acid (6-MNA) which is a relatively selective cyclo-oxygenase-2 inhibitor that has anti-inflammatory and analgesic properties. Nabumetone and its metabolites bind extensively to plasma albumin. Nabumetone is eliminated following biotransformation to 6-MNA, which does not undergo enterohepatic circulation and the respective glucoroconjugated metabolites are excreted in urine. Substantial concentrations of 6-MNA are attained in synovial fluid, which is he proposed site of action in chronic inflammatory arthropathies. A smaller area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) is evident at steady state as compared with a single dose; this is possibly due to an increase in the volume of distribution and saturation of protein binding. Relationships between 6-MNA concentrations and the therapeutic and toxicological effects have yet to be elucidated for this NSAID. Renal failure significantly reduces 6-MNA elimination but steady-state concentrations of 6-MNA are not increased, possibly because of nonlinear protein binding. Elderly patients with osteoarthritis demonstrate decreased elimination and increased plasma concentrations of nabumetone as compared with young healthy volunteers. Rheumatic disease activity also influences 6-MNA plasma concentrations, as patients with more active disease and lower serum albumin concentrations demonstrate a lower area under the plasma concentration versus time curve. A reduced bioavailability of 6-MNA in patients with severe hepatic impairment is also evident. Dosage adjustment may be required in the elderly, patients with active rheumatic disease and those with hepatic impairment, but not in patients with mild-to-moderate renal failure.
Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non-Steroidal
Butanones
Cyclooxygenase Inhibitors
Dose-Response Relationship, Drug
Humans
Intestinal Absorption
Nabumetone
Protein Binding
Synovial Fluid
Tissue Distribution
