The intracellular dioxin (aryl hydrocarbon) receptor mediates signal transduction by dioxin (2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin) and related environmental pollutants and functions as a ligand-activated transcription factor. In this study we have examined the effects on dioxin receptor function of a potentially novel ligand, omeprazole, which is widely clinically used as a gastric anti-ulcer drug. In primary human hepatocytes omeprazole potently induced cytochrome P4501A1 mRNA expression, whereas this effect was not detected in mouse primary hepatocytes. In human hepatoma cells omeprazole was found to induce transcription of reporter genes via the xenobiotic response element that is recognized by the ligand-activated dioxin receptor. In contrast, the human dioxin receptor was not activated by omeprazole upon expression in a receptor-deficient mouse hepatoma cell line. In a reconstituted yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) model system, however, both the mouse and human dioxin receptors were potently activated by omeprazole. Although omeprazole failed to displace dioxin in in vitro ligand binding assays, a residue within the ligand binding domain that is critical for dioxin binding in vitro was also critical for omeprazole responsiveness in vivo. Consistent with this observation, both omeprazole and dioxin responsiveness of the dioxin receptor was inhibited in mutant yeast cells expressing low levels of the molecular chaperone hsp90 that is critical for ligand binding activity. The sulfoxide group that is essential for formation of a planar conversion product of omeprazole was found to be critical for dioxin receptor activation. Taken together, these data suggest that omeprazole represents a precursor for a novel class of dioxin receptor agonists that are bona fide dioxin receptor ligands but generated in a strictly species-specific manner.
Animals
Binding Sites
Cytochrome P-450 CYP1A1
Enzyme Inhibitors
Gene Expression Regulation, Enzymologic
Genes, Reporter
Humans
Liver Neoplasms, Experimental
Mice
Omeprazole
Point Mutation
Receptors, Aryl Hydrocarbon
Species Specificity
Structure-Activity Relationship
