PURPOSE: Therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) of antipsychotics can aid in therapy optimization, explaining adverse effects or non-response. One reason for therapeutic failure or adverse effects is caused by genetic variations in the cytochrome P450 drug-metabolizing genes. The aim of this study was to evaluate the impact of CYP2D6 polymorphisms on steady-state serum concentrations of antipsychotics metabolized by CYP2D6, taking into account the co-medication with CYP2D6 inhibitors.
METHODS: Serum and EDTA samples were collected from 82 psychiatric patients. After a liquid-liquid extraction, serum samples were analyzed using an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometric (UHPLC-MS/MS) method for quantification of the antipsychotics. CYP2D6 genotyping was performed using the Luminex xTAG® CYP2D6 Kit v3 (Luminex Corporation). Patients were divided into five phenotype subgroups by calculation of the activity score (AS): poor metabolizers (PM; AS 0), intermediate metabolizers (IM; AS 0.5-1), extensive metabolizers with slow activity (EM-s; AS 1-1.5), extensive metabolizers with fast activity (EM-f; AS 2), and ultra-rapid metabolizers (UM; AS >2). The influence of the phenotypes on the concentration-to-dose and metabolite-to-parent ratios was evaluated.
RESULTS: Overall, 6.1 % UM (n = 5), 25.6 % EM-f (n = 21), 46.3 % EM-s (n = 38), 1.2 % EM-s/EM-f (n = 1), 6.1 % IM (n = 5), and 14.6 % PM (n = 12) were found, taking co-administration of strong and moderate CYP2D6 inhibitors into account (phenoconversion). It was demonstrated that CYP2D6 polymorphisms affect the serum concentrations of aripiprazole (n = 18), haloperidol (n = 11), risperidone (n = 20), and zuclopenthixol (n = 6), while no influence was seen on the paliperidone serum concentrations (n = 31).
CONCLUSIONS: Even with a small number of patients per antipsychotic, the importance of CYP2D6 genotyping was still clearly stated. This study illustrates the high potential of combining TDM and CYP2D6 genotyping in clinical practice.
Adult
Aged
Antipsychotic Agents
Aripiprazole
Clopenthixol
Cytochrome P-450 CYP2D6
Drug Monitoring
Drug Therapy, Combination
Female
Genotype
Haloperidol
Humans
Male
Middle Aged
Paliperidone Palmitate
Young Adult
