Valaciclovir, the L-valyl ester of aciclovir (acyclovir), is an oral prodrug that undergoes rapid and extensive first-pass metabolism to yield aciclovir and the essential amino acid L-valine. Aciclovir, the active antiviral component of valaciclovir, shows good in vitro activity against the herpesviruses herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1, HSV-2 and varicella zoster virus. The bioavailability of aciclovir from oral valaciclovir is considerably greater than that achieved after oral aciclovir administration. Thus, valaciclovir delivers therapeutic aciclovir concentrations when administered in a less frequent oral dosage regimen than is required for aciclovir. Valaciclovir is an effective treatment for herpes zoster in immunocompetent adults. In a large comparative study that included patients > or = 50 years of age, valaciclovir (1000mg 3 times daily for 7 or 14 days) and oral aciclovir (800mg 5 times daily) were equally effective in achieving resolution of cutaneous zoster lesions. Importantly, valaciclovir was significantly more effective than aciclovir in reducing the duration of zoster-associated pain. Preliminary results of several studies indicate that valaciclovir (500 to 1000mg twice daily for 5 to 10 days) is as effective as aciclovir (200mg 5 times a day for 5 to 10 days) in the treatment of genital herpes. In patients with first or recurrent episodes of genital herpes, valaciclovir reduced the duration of viral shedding, hastened lesion healing and decreased lesion-associated pain. Valaciclovir was also effective in suppressing recurrent episodes of genital herpes and significantly prolonged the time to a recurrent episode of infection compared with placebo. Valaciclovir is a well tolerated drug; in herpes zoster and HSV studies its tolerability profile was similar to that of aciclovir or placebo. Valaciclovir represents and advance in antiherpes drug therapy and is a useful treatment option for patients with herpes zoster or genital herpes. It is at least as effective as aciclovir and is administered in a more convenient oral dosage regimen. Thus, valaciclovir may ultimately succeed aciclovir as a first-line treatment for genital herpes or herpes zoster.
Acyclovir
Adult
Animals
Antiviral Agents
Drug Resistance, Microbial
Drug Tolerance
Herpes Genitalis
Herpes Zoster
Herpesviridae
Herpesviridae Infections
Humans
Middle Aged
Recurrence
Valacyclovir
Valine
