1. Miconazole, an imidazole antifungal agent, is associated with acquired long QT syndrome and ventricular arrhythmias. Miconazole increases the plasma concentration of QT-prolonging drugs by inhibiting the hepatic cytochrome P450 metabolic pathway, but whether it has direct effects on cardiac ion channels has not been elucidated. 2. To determine the mechanism underlying these clinical findings, we investigated the effect of miconazole on human ether-a-go-go-related gene (HERG) K+ channels. 3. HERG channels were heterologously expressed in human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) cells and whole-cell currents were recorded using a patch-clamp technique (23 degrees C). 4. Miconazole inhibited HERG peak tail current in a concentration-dependent manner (0.4-40 microM) with an IC50 of 2.1 microM (n=3-5 cells at each concentration, Hill coefficient 1.2). HERG block was not frequency-dependent. It required channel activation, occurred rapidly, and had very slow dissociation properties. 5. The activation curve was shifted in a negative direction (V(1/2): -9.5+/-2.3 mV in controls and -15.3+/-2.4 mV after 4 microM miconazole, P<0.05, n=6). Miconazole did not change other channel kinetics (activation, deactivation, onset of inactivation, recovery from inactivation, steady-state inactivation). 6. The S6 domain mutation, F656C, abolished the inhibitory action of miconazole on HERG current indicating that miconazole preferentially binds to an aromatic amino-acid residue within the pore-S6 region. 7. Our findings indicate that miconazole causes HERG channel block by binding to a common drug receptor, and this involves preferential binding to activated channels. Thus, miconazole prolongs the QT interval by direct inhibition of HERG channels.
Action Potentials
Antifungal Agents
Cell Line
Dose-Response Relationship, Drug
ERG1 Potassium Channel
Ether-A-Go-Go Potassium Channels
Humans
Inhibitory Concentration 50
Long QT Syndrome
Miconazole
Patch-Clamp Techniques
Potassium Channel Blockers
Potassium Channels, Voltage-Gated
