OBJECTIVE: To compare the cyclooxygenase (COX) activity and anti-inflammatory effects of the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) ketorolac tromethamine (ketorolac) and bromfenac sodium (bromfenac).
METHODS: Cyclooxygenase activity and selectivity was determined in vitro by measuring prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) production following incubation of varying concentrations of NSAID with human recombinant COX-1 or COX-2 and arachidonic acid. Anti-inflammatory effects were evaluated in a rabbit model in which an ocular inflammatory response was induced by intravenous injection of 10 microg/kg lipopolysaccharide (LPS). In study animals, one eye was treated with 50 microL (+/-) ketorolac 0.4% (Acular LS) or bromfenac 0.09% (Xibrom) and the other eye with 50 microL buffered saline. In control animals, both eyes were treated with vehicle. All animals were treated twice: 2 hours and 1 hour before LPS.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: PGE(2) production in vitro, measured by enzyme immunoassay; fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-dextran leakage into the anterior chamber, measured by fluorophotometry; aqueous PGE(2) levels in vivo, measured by ELISA immunoassay.
RESULTS: Ketorolac was six times more active against COX-1 (IC(50) = 0.02 microM) than COX-2 (IC(50) = 0.12 microM) while bromfenac was approximately 32 times more active against COX-2 (IC(50) = 0.0066 microM) than COX-1 (IC(50) = 0.210 microM). In the animal model, both drugs resulted in nearly complete inhibition of FITC-dextran leakage and PGE(2) production in the anterior chamber of treated eyes. There was also a 79% inhibition (p < 0.001) of FITC-dextran leakage in the contralateral eyes of bromfenac-treated rabbits, and a 22.5% inhibition (not statistically significant) in the contralateral eyes of ketorolac-treated rabbits.
CONCLUSIONS: Ketorolac is relatively COX-1 selective while bromfenac is potently selective for COX-2 over COX-1. In the animal model, both ketorolac 0.4% and bromfenac 0.09% demonstrated maximal anti-inflammatory activity in treated eyes. Only bromfenac 0.09% had a significant effect on the contralateral eye, suggesting possible systemic absorption of this drug.
Animals
Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non-Steroidal
Benzophenones
Bromobenzenes
Cyclooxygenase 1
Cyclooxygenase 2
Cyclooxygenase 2 Inhibitors
Enzyme Activation
Eye Diseases
Humans
Inflammation
Ketorolac Tromethamine
Rabbits
Recombinant Proteins
