OBJECTIVE: Angiotensin II-receptor blockers are an established class of antihypertensive agents, but the differences between individual members of the class are largely unknown. The present study employed an animal model to demonstrate angiotensin II-receptor blocker-specific effects and to quantify these differences by comparing two common agents, losartan and valsartan.
METHODS: We measured the effects on angiotensin II AT2-receptor-mediated renal cGMP by microdialysis in the outer renal cortex in conscious normotensive, sodium-depleted, 4-week-old Sprague-Dawley rats. Rats (n = 8) were given equimolar and equidepressor doses of losartan (0.02 mmol/kg) or valsartan (0.02 mmol/kg) either intravenously or orally. Time was allowed for the conversion of losartan into its active metabolite, EXP 3174.
RESULTS: Both drugs had equal effects on blood pressure. There were significantly greater increases in cGMP levels after administration of valsartan than of losartan with both routes of administration. Intravenous administration of valsartan led to a 69.1% increase in cGMP, versus a 10.3% increase with losartan. Five hours after oral administration of valsartan, a 48% increase in cGMP was observed versus a 10.9% increase with losartan. The increase after oral administration of valsartan was sustained 8 h after administration, whereas the effect of losartan was not sustained. The effects of losartan and valsartan on cGMP were completely inhibited by AT2-receptor blockade.
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that AT1-receptor blockade with valsartan influences AT2-receptor-mediated angiotensin II responses to a greater extent than with losartan, as quantified by renal interstitial fluid cGMP.
Administration, Oral
Angiotensin II
Angiotensin Receptor Antagonists
Animals
Blood Pressure
Cyclic GMP
Extracellular Space
Female
Imidazoles
Injections, Intravenous
Kidney
Losartan
Pyridines
Rats
Rats, Sprague-Dawley
Receptor, Angiotensin, Type 1
Receptor, Angiotensin, Type 2
Receptors, Angiotensin
Tetrazoles
Valine
Valsartan
