1. We compared the alpha 1-, alpha 2- and beta 1-adrenoceptor blocking potencies of labetalol with those of its two stereoisomers (RR and SR) in pithed rats and in homogenized rat cerebral cortex and heart. 2. In pithed rats, labetalol and the RR-SR combination were given orally either at doses of 25 and 50 mg kg-1 body wt. or intravenously at doses of 1 and 5 mg kg-1 body wt. Prazosin 4 and 20 micrograms kg-1 body wt. and propranolol 1 and 5 mg kg-1 body wt., were given intravenously for comparison studies of potency at alpha 1- and beta 1-adrenoceptors, respectively. Effects were studied before and after i.v. administration of either phenylephrine (at doses which increased the mean arterial pressure by approximately 80 mmHg) or isoprenaline (at doses that increased heart rate by approximately 100 beats min-1). 3. In pithed rats, labetalol and the RR-SR combination antagonized, in a dose-dependent manner, the pressor effect of phenylephrine (P less than 0.05) and the chronotropic effect of isoprenaline (P less than 0.05). Following both oral and intravenous dosing, the RR-SR combination was twice potent as labetalol in terms of alpha 1- and beta 1-adrenoceptor antagonism at equivalent doses. 4. Labetalol and the enantiomers lacked affinity at alpha 2-adrenoceptors while at alpha 1-adrenoceptors the order of potency was prazosin much greater than RR-SR greater than labetalol. At beta 1-adrenoceptors, the affinity of the compound RR-SR was about 3 times that of labetalol.5. As labetalol is a mixture of active (RR and SR) and inactive (SS and SR) enantiomers (in terms of alpha and beta receptor actions), the combination of RR and SR may be a valuable substitute for labetalol in the treatment of systemic hypertension. Although the potential for non-specific side effects (common to all four enantiomers) could be expected to be diminished, recent reports by postmarketing surveillance indicate that the RR isomer (dilevalol) can induce liver toxicity. Interestingly, labetalol is devoid of this effect; whether the combination of RR and SR enantiomers could be of clinical importance warrants further investigation.
Adrenergic alpha-Antagonists
Adrenergic beta-Antagonists
Animals
Blood Pressure
Cerebral Cortex
Dose-Response Relationship, Drug
Heart
Heart Rate
In Vitro Techniques
Isoproterenol
Labetalol
Male
Myocardium
Phenylephrine
Prazosin
Propranolol
Rats
Receptors, Adrenergic, alpha
Receptors, Adrenergic, beta
Stereoisomerism
